- Feature Name: `wyll`
- Start Date: `11-10-17`
- RFC PR: (leave this empty)
- See also: [RFC#0017](https://github.com/Whiley/RFCs/blob/master/text/0017-runtime-type-information.md)


# Table of Contents  
* [Summary](#summary)  
* [Motivation](#motivation)  
* [Technical Details](#details)
  * [Types](#types)
    * [Representations](#representations)
  * [Coercions](#coercions)
  * [Back Propagation](#propagation)
  * [Accessors](#accessors)
  * [Runtime Type Information](#rtti)
  * [Borrowing](#borrowing) 
  * [Name Mangling](#mangling)
  * [Multiple Returns](#returns)  
* [Drawbacks and Limitations](#drawbacks)
* [Unresolved Issues](#unresolved)

<a name="summary"/>

# Summary

This provides a general summary of the compilation process from Whiley
to low-level target platforms (e.g. JavaScript, Java, C, etc).  As
part of this, the Whiley Low Level Language (WyLL) is introduced as an
abstraction to simplify code generators.

<a name="motivation"/>

# Motivation

In constructing code generators from WyIL to different target
platforms (e.g. JavaScript, Java, C, etc) a number of common problems
have arisen.  The purpose of this document is to detail those problems
and their solutions.  In addition, this document introduces the Whiley
Low Level Language (WyLL) which provides an abstraction layer below
WyIL.  The purpose of this abstraction layer is to provide generic
solutions to prevent backends from constantly reinventing the wheel.

By far, the hardest problems in compiling for a target platform stem
from the complex nature of types in Whiley.  This mostly (though not
exclusively) arises from flow typing. Consider this Whiley code:

```
function f(int|null x) -> (int r):
    if x is int:
        return x
    else:
        return 0
```

Here, the type of `x` is `(int|null)&int)` on the true branch and
`(int|null)&!int` on the false branch.  _But, how should such types be
represented on a given target platform?_ Such types are retained at
the WyIL level because they include useful nominal information which
(amongst other things) is important for error reporting and
verification.

The above types for `x` can easily be simplified to `int` and `null`
respectively.  But that raises another question: _can all types be
simplified in some way?_ In fact, the answer is **no** (though there are
useful approximations we can use).

<a name="details"/>

# Technical Details

This document is concerned with the compilation of Whiley programs to
a range of target platforms, including JavaScript, Java and C.  Other
platforms, such as LLVM and WebAssembly are also of interest.  Whilst
each of these platforms has differences, they also have lots in
common.  

The Whiley Low Level Language can be thought of as a simple imperative
language that strips away much of the complexity found in Whiley's
type system and semantics.  The intention is that this captures the
commonalities across target platforms.  We can summarise these
commonalities as follows:

- **Types**.  We assume the target platform provides a range of
  primitive types.  This includes _booleans_, _fixed-width_ and
  _unbound integers_, _arrays_, _records_, _references_ and _lambdas_
  (a.k.a. function pointers or closures).  Furthermore, we assume that
  reference types have a finite representation regardless of what they
  refer to.  Finally, we assume that recursive types are not natively
  supported and, instead, must simulated using references.

- **Value Semantics**.  We assume the target platform does not
  necessarily provide value semantics for all types.  For example,
  arrays and objects in Java have reference semantics.  As such,
  cloning of values is necessary at different points (though the exact
  details are platform specific).

- **Methods**.  We assume the target platform provides a general
  concept of a function or method which can be invoked.  Whilst this
  can accept zero or more parameters, we assume it only supports zero
  or one return value (i.e. no platform we are aware of natively supports
  multiple returns).  In addition, whilst overloading may be possible
  on the target platform, we assume true overloading of Whiley types
  is not possible.  As such, a mechanism for _name mangling_ is
  required.

- **Statements & Expressions.** We assume the usual range of
  statements and expressions is supported.  This includes
  conditionals, loops, switches, etc.  In general, translation of
  statements and expressions in Whiley to WyLL is straightforward and
  is largely ignored in this document.

We note that each platform supports these features in different ways.
The WyLL is intended to be parameterised to allow for this.

<a name="types"/>

## Types

Whiley supports a wide range of both finitely sized and infinitely
sized types.  For example, it natively supports `int:13`, `uint:5`,
`int:15[]`, etc.  As such, it is unreasonable to expect the target
platform to support such a large range of types.  Instead, a _mapping_
from Whiley types to native types is assumed and is used to guide the
generation of WyLL for the given platform.

The language of types supported in WyLL is given as follows:

* **(Booleans)**.  We assume the target platform has support for
  encoding boolean types (even if this is done using simple integer
  types).

* **(Integers)**.  We assume arbitrary fixed-width signed and unsigned
  integers are supported (e.g. `int:13`, `uint:16`, etc).  For
  example, `int:n` maps to `byte` in Java when `1 <= n <= 8`, to
  `short` when `9 <= n <= 16`, etc.  In JavaScript, we can map `int:n`
  to native numbers upto `n=52`, whilst in C we would map `int:7` to
  `int8_t`, `int:13` to `int_16_t`, etc.  In addition, the target
  platform is assumed to provide a translation for unbounded integers
  (e.g. `BigInteger` in Java, or through GMP in C, etc).

* **(Records)**.  We assume an arbitrary sized record type is
available (e.g. `{int x, int y}`).  For example, in Java this might
map to a class of some kind (e.g. `Struct`), whilst in JavaScript this
maps to an object. **Open Records?**

* **(Arrays)**.  We assume an arbitrary sized array type is available
(e.g. `int[]` maps to `int[]` in Java, and an array in JavaScript, etc).

* **(References)**.  We assume an arbitrary reference type is available
  (e.g. `&int`).  In both Java and JavaScript, for example, this would
  be achieved with some kind of boxing strategy.

* **(Lambda)**.  We assume an arbitrary function type is available
  (e.g. `(int,int)->(int)`, etc).  In Java, this can be implemented
  with some kind of class or interface (e.g. by generalising
  `Function`).  In JavaScript, closures are easily applied.

* **(Unions)**.  We assume a mechanism exists for representing a
  variable which may hold values from any two different types
  (e.g. `int|null`, etc).  In Java we can achieve this via `Object`,
  provided that primitives are boxed, whilst in JavaScript it's automatic.

Of importance here are the Whiley types are not supported in WyLL.
Most notably, these includes _intersections_ and _negations_.  These
must be compiled out when generated WyLL.

<a name="representations"/>

### Representations

The question of how to translate between arbitrary Whiley types and
the more restricted form supported in WyLL is challenging.  There are
three aspects:

- **Simple Types**.  These are non-recursive types which do not
  involve intersection or negation.  They are the so-called simple
  types because they map directly to WyLL types.

- **Complex Types.** These are more difficult and, indeed, one may
  wonder why the language supports them at all!  Mostly, they exist
  because of flow typing though intersections, for example, can be
  useful in some cases for combining type invariants.

- **Recursive Types**.  These are types which are defined in terms of
  themselves.  They are necessarily rooted at a nominal type
  declaration.

**Simple Types.** These don't warrant further discussion (though
perhaps there are some questions regarding whether or not they should
be flattened).

**Complex Types.** The Whiley Intermediate Language (WyIL) preserves a
_lossless_ view of types generated via flow type checking.  Whilst
such types can be complex in nature, preserving them is necessary as
(amongst other things) they include useful nominal information which
is needed for error reporting and verification.  For example, consider
this Whiley code:

```
function f(int|null x) -> (int r):
    if x is int:
        return x
    else:
        return 0
```

Here, the type of `x` on the true branch is `(int|null)&int)`.  This
can easily be simplified to `(int&int)|(null&int)` and then to `int`.
Likewise, on the false branch we have `(int|null)&!int` which
simplifies to `(int&!int)|(null&!int)` and then to `null`.

From the perspective of WyLL, the above is not as challenging as it
may at first seem.  _The most important observation is that WyLL need
only concern itself with types explicitly denoted in the source code_.
In the above example, WyLL does not consider the intermediate types
generated from flow typing (e.g. `(int|null)&int)`).  Rather, it need
only coerce `x` from type `int|null` to `int` on the true branch.

Despite the above observation, WyLL must still handle arbitrarily
complex types since the user can explicitly denote them.  A good
example is the following:

```
type XHTML is XML & HTML
```

This declares that the `XHTML` type is both an instance of the `XML`
type and the `HTML` type.  Unfortunately, we cannot always get rid of
intersections and negations through simplification.  After conversion
to DNF, we are left with a union of conjuncts of the form `T1 - T2 -
... - Tn` (where `T1-T2` is shorthand for `T1&!T2`).  Examples here
include `any-null` and `{any x}-{int x}`, as any further
simplification is _lossy_.  We observe that, for any complex type `S`,
there is a _minimal_ simple type `T` where `S <: T`.  We refer to `T`
as the _representation type_ as it is the minimal underlying
representation needed to store values of S.  For example, `any-null`
is safely approximated as `any`; likewise, `{any x}-{int x}` is safely
approximated as `{any x}`.  Indeed, a type of the form `T1 - T2 -
... - Tn` is always safely approximated by `T1`.


**Recursive Types**.  The obvious way to handle recursive types is to
compile _back pointers_ into references.  For example, this Whiley
code:

```
type LinkedList is null | { LinkedList next, int data }
```

becomes this WyLL code:

```
type LinkedList is null | { &LinkedList next, int data }
```

_The key challenge here is to work out where the backlinks are, and
also to figure out how to manipulate them properly_.

<a name="coercions"/>

## Coercions

Implicit or explicit type coercions present numerous challenges for
code generation.  Furthermore, the exact requirements for when a
coercion is required depend entirely on the target platform.  Consider
this example:

```
function read(int:8[] items, usize i) -> (int:32 result):
    return items[i]
```

Here, an implicit coercion is placed after the array access to convert
from an `int:8` to an `int:32`.  Of course, the need for this coercion
depends on the target platform.  On Java we need to cast from a `byte`
to an `int` but, on JavaScript, nothing needs to be done.

The set of possible coercions is classified as follows:

- **Widening / Narrowing**.  A simple transformation between integer
  types (e.g. `int:8` to `int:16`, or from `int:16` to `int:8`).  Most
  platforms require such coercions, but the exact details vary.  For
  example, even in Javascript going from `int:8` to `int` requires an
  explicit coercion.

- **Reordering**. A simple transformation between record types
  (e.g. `{int x, int y}` to `{int y, int x}`).  Not all platforms
  require such coercions.  For example, in JavaScript objects are
  dictionaries and, hence, are order agnostic.  But, in a language
  like C, the exact ordering is important.

- **Opening / Closing**. A transformation to/from a smaller record
  type to/from a larger record.  For example, from `{int x, int y}` to
  `{int x, ...}` or from `{int x, ...}` to `{int x, int y}`.  Again,
  the need for this depends on the platform and, in particular, what
  type test operations are available.  For example, in both Java and
  JavaScript, such coercions are not likely to be necessary.  But, in
  a language like C, they are certainly necessary.

- **Tagging / Untagging**. A transformation to/from a tagged union.
  For example, from `int` to `int|null` or from `int|null` to `int`.
  On the assumption that integer tags are used to distinguish unions,
  then most platforms will require such coercions.  However, on some
  platforms (e.g. Java), it is possible to implement unions using only
  the underlying type test operators and tags could be omitted (though
  this not consider ideal).

- **Retagging**. A transformation between union types (e.g. `int|null`
  to `null|bool|int`).  This occurs when a value in a union flows into
  another value in a union.  The need for such coercions, again,
  depends as above for tagging / untagging.

The implementation of coercions at the WyLL level assumes only a
primitive operator for converting integer types (e.g. between an
`int:8` and an `int:16`, etc), and three operators on unions
(entering, leaving and inspecting).  All other coercions are
implemented using existing WyLL types, statements and expression
(though in some cases, it may be preferable to override this).  The
following examples attempt to clarify this somewhat:

**Unions.**  Consider the following Whiley code:

```
function f(int[]|null narr) -> (int[] r):
   if narr is int[]
      return narr
   else:
      return []
```

This would generate (roughly) the following WyLL code:

```
int[] f_u2ain(int[]|null narr) {
  if(narr? == 0) { return narr#0; }
  else { return []; }
}
```

Here, the tag access operator `?` simply returns the value of the tag,
whilst the untag operator `e#c` coerces the payload into the given
type.

**Arrays.** These are more complex because they necessarily require
the construction of a new array.  The following illustrates:

```
function f(int:8[] xs) -> (int:16[] ys):
    return xs
```

This would generate (roughly) the following WyLL code:

```
int:16[] f_ai(int:8[] xs) {
   return cast$1(xs);
}

int:16[] cast$1(int:8[] xs) {
  int:16[] ys = [0; |xs|]
  for(int i=0;i!=|ys|;++i) {
    ys[i] = (int:16) xs[i];
  }
  return ys;	
}
```

Observe that on platforms where, for example, `int:8` has the same
representation as `int:16`, the above coercion is unnecessary.  The
given type mapping then prevents the coercion from being created as
the Whiley type `int:8` would map to the WyLL type `int:16`, etc.

**Records.** These are relatively straightforward using a record
  initialiser.  The following illustrates:

```
function f({int:8 x} rec) -> ({int:16 x} res):
    return rec
```

This would generate (roughly) the following WyLL code:

```
{int:16 x} f_ri1x({int:8 x} rec) {
   return { x: (int:16) rec.x };
}
```

Again, the primitive integer coercion operator `(int:16)` is used as
the fundamental building block.


<a name="propagation"/>

## Type Propagation

Type propagation is essentially an optimisation to improve the
placement of coercions.  The following illustrates:

```
function f(int x) -> ((int|bool)[] xs):
   return [x,x]
```

By default, the array initialiser will construct an array of type
`int[]` which would then need to be coerced to an array of type
`(int|bool)[]` (which amounts to cloning the array).  However, if we
know the ultimate destination is the type `(int|bool)[]` then we can
just create the original array with that representation.

Whilst back-propagation makes a lot of sense, there are complications
to deal with.  Consider this variation:

```
function f(int:8 x) -> (int:16[]|bool xs):
   return [x,x]
```

The question here is: _what type should the array initialiser have?_
Certainly, it cannot have type `int:16[]|bool` as this is not an array
type.  Likewise, type `int:8` is not optimal for reasons explained
above.  Therefore, we _intersect_ the actual type (`int:8`) with the
target type (`int:16[]|bool`) to determine the correct type.

<a name="accessors"/>

## Accessors

The presence of readable/writeable types motivates the need for the
so-called _accessors_.  Consider the following example:

```
function f(int[]|bool[] arr) -> (int|bool r):
   return arr[0]
```

Here, we need to generate (roughly) the following WyLL code:

```
int|bool f(int[]|bool[] arr) {
  return read$1(arr,0)
}

int|bool read$1(int[]|bool[] arr, int i) {
   if(arr? == 0) { return arr#0[i]; }
   else { return arr#1[i]; }
}
```

In this case, each array access is compiled down to use a concrete
array type.  Records and references also support readable types in a
similar fashion.

Writeable types work in roughly the same way.  For example:

```
type Record is {int|bool field}|{bool|null field}
function f(Record rec) -> (Record r):
   rec.field = false
   return rec
```

Here, we need to a setter rather than a getter.  It might look
something like this:

```
Record f(Record rec) {
  rec = write$1(rec,false);
  return rec;
}

Record write$1(Record rec, bool v) {
   if(rec? == 0) { rec#0.field = v; }
   else { rec#1.field = v; }
   return rec;
}
```

Again, both record assignments now operate on record types directly,
rather than on union types.

<a name="rtti"/>

## Runtime Type Information

_(See also [RFC#0017](https://github.com/Whiley/RFCs/blob/master/text/0017-runtime-type-information.md))_

Runtime type information is required to answer runtime type tests.
There are two primary categories of information here: _finite_ and
_infinite_.  The former can be handled relatively easily through the
use of runtime type tags, whilst the latter is more complex and
different approaches are needed for different platforms.

**Finite Type Information.** This is generated through the use of
union types.  The following illustrates the canonical example:

```
type msg is {int kind, int payload}|{int kind, int[] payload}

function msg(int k, int p) -> (msg r):
   return {kind: k, payload: p}
```

Here, finite type information is generated at the point of the return
in the form of a _runtime type tag_.  The value `{kind: k, payload:
p}` is said to enter the union at this point.  In WyRL this looks like
the following:

```
msg msg(int k, int p) {
  return {kind: k, payload: p}#0;
}
```

Here the expression `{kind: k, payload: p}#0` adds tag `0` to the
left-hand side, where the tag value is determined at compile time.

**FIXME:** _What about recursive types?_

**Infinite Type Information**.

<a name="borrowing"/>

## Borrowing

The presence of _value semantics_ in Whiley presents some challenges
for efficient compilation.  Specifically, we want to avoid cloning
large data structures (e.g. arrays) as much as possible.

A _move analysis_ phase helps determine when a value of a dynamically
sized data type can be "moved" or must be "copied".  Moving is
preferable (when permitted) because then the original reference can be
used without copying the underlying data (hence, is significantly more
efficient). The following provides a useful example:

```
function g(int[] xs, int i) -> (int[] ys):
    xs[j] = get(xs,i,i)
    return xs
```
	
In the invocation `get(xs,i,i)` the array `xs` cannot be moved since it is
live afterwards. Instead, we must clone `xs` at this point. However,
the subsequent use of `xs` in the `return` statement does not require
a clone and can be moved (since `xs` is no longer live).

The following illustrates another situation where temporary moves or
"borrows" are permitted:

```
function get(int[] xs, int i, int j) -> (int r):
    int sum = xs[i]
    sum = sum + xs[j]
    return sum
```
	
Clearly, there is no need to clone `xs` when it is used in the
initialiser for `sum`. This is because the use is temporary and does
not modify `xs`. We say that `xs` is not _consumed_.

Finally, it's worth noting that, in fact, the invocation above to
`get(xs,i,i)` could (in theory) avoid cloning `xs`.  This is possible
when it is known at the call site that `xs` is not modified to by the
invocation.  Such knowledge could come from an interprocedural
analysis, though this may be expensive.  However, it can also come
from the presence of `final` modifiers on variables.  For example, if
we updated the signature for `get()` as follows:

```
function get(final int[] xs, int i, int j) -> (int r):
   ...
```

Here, calles to `get()` know that the `xs` parameter will not be
modified and, hence, they can safely avoid cloning.

<a name="mangling"/>

## Name Mangling

WyLL provides a default mechanism for type mangling which translates
Whiley types into ASCII strings containing only lowercase/uppercase
characters, digits and the underscore. The translation is:

* **Primitives**. Each primitive types is encoded using a single capital
letter. Here, `Null` is `N`, `Bool` is `B`, `Int` is `I`.

* **Nominals**. These are encoded using a single uppercase prefix
`Q` followed by, for each component, the number of characters and
then the component identifier. For example, the name
`std::ascii::string` gives `Q3std4ascii6string`.

* **Arrays**. These are encoded using a single lowercase prefix
`a`, followed by the mangled element type. For example,
`int[]` gives "`aI`".

* **References**. These are encoded using a single lowercase prefix of
either `q`. For non-static references, this is followed by the
lifetime index which is a De Bruijn index. Eitherway, the mangled element
type follows next. For example, `&int` gives "`qI`",
whilst `&l:bool` gives "`q0B`" (assuming lifetime
`l` is the first declared lifetime variable).

* **Records**. These are encoded using a single lowercase prefix
`r` followed by the number of fields then, for each field, its
mangled type followed by the number of characters in the field name and then
the field name itself. For example, the type `{int op, bool flag}`
gives the mangle "`r2I2opB4flag`". This encoding accounts
correctly for the possibility of nested records.

* **Callables**. Functions, Methods and Properties are encoded using the
prefixes `f`, `m` and `p` respectively.
These are followed by the number of parameters and the parameter mangles and,
likewise, for the returns. For example, `function(int,bool)->any`
becomes "`f2IB1A`".

* **Unions, Intersections and Negations**. Negations are handled as for
arrays using the prefix `n`. Unions and intersections are handled
using the prefixes `u` and `i` respectively. This is
followed by the number of components and then the components themselves. For
example, `int|null` becomes "`u2IN`".

<a name="returns"/>

## Multiple Returns

No target platform that we're aware of natively supports multiple
returns (though, potentially, something like LLVM might).  Therefore,
multiple returns are compiled away when generating WyLL and this is
relatively straightforward.  For assignments it's really easy, for
multiple returns it's _slightly_ harder (to do well).

**Multiple Assignments**.  Consider a multiple assignment like this:

```
int x, int y, int z 

x,y,z = 1,f()
```

Here, `f()` returns two `int`s.  The obvious translation is this:

```
x = 1
{int f1, int f2} tmp = f()
y = tmp.f1
z = tmp.f2
```

_Obviously, we need to be careful about the variable name introduced
to prevent clashes._

**Multiple Returns**.  These can be handled in exactly the same way
  above by reusing the declared returns.  However, we might want
  something neater in some cases.  For example, we could translate
  this:

```
return x,y
```

into this:

```
return {x: x, y: y}
```

But, of course, we can't do that with an actual multiple return.
Therefore, this:

```
return x,f()
```
becomes this:

```
{int f1, int f2} tmp = f()
return x, tmp.f1, tmp.f2
```

_However, care needs to be taken for side-effecting expressions as
these must still be evaluated in the correct order._

<a name="drawbacks"/>

# Drawbacks and Limitations

None.

<a name="unresolved"/>

# Unresolved Issues

Plenty.

